hey this is pressure Walker on the
morning of January 1st a hospital
nursery has three boys and some number
of girls that night a woman gives birth
to a child and the child is placed in
the nursery On January 2nd a
statistician conducts a survey and
selects a child at random from the
nursery the survey includes the newborn
child and every child in the nursery
from January 1st the randomly selected
child is a boy what is the probability
the child born on January 1st was a boy
this problem has been asked as an
interview question for technical jobs
can you figure it out give this prom a
try and when you're ready keep watching
the video for the solution I'll get
started with a common misconception the
answer is not 50% while it is true that
there is an equal 50% chance that the
newborn child is a boy or a girl
that is not the probability you're
looking for the question is asking for
the probability of a newborn boy given
that the statistician randomly picked a
boy how is this different
imagine the nursery started with zero
boys if the statistician randomly picked
a boy you would know the newborn must
have been a boy that would be a hundred
percent probability in general because
the statistician randomly selected a boy
it is more likely that the newborn child
was a boy intuitively the probability
will be greater than 50% now let's
calculate it and see what it is
the problem does not specify the number
of girls at the beginning but will
assume three girls and see where this
calculation goes so we start out with
three girls and three boys there's a 50%
chance that the newborn child is a boy
this makes for three girls and four boys
there's also a 50% chance that the
newborn is a girl which makes for four
girls and three boys so what's the
probability of selecting a boy in each
case in the top branch there are four
boys out of seven children total this is
a four out of seven chance and we
multiply that by the 50% chance of being
in this branch of having a boy this is
the probability of selecting a boy and
having the newborn child be a boy in the
bottom branch there are three boys out
of seven children and we need to
multiply by the 50% chance that the
child born was a girl this is the
probability of selecting a boy and
having the newborn child be a girl so
what's the probability of selecting a
boy this is the sum of these two
probabilities this will be equal to
three and a half divided by seven and
this makes sense intuitively we're
either going to have three or four boys
so an average we have three and a half
boys and we're always going to have
seven children so we have three and a
half out of seven and that's a 50%
chance so what's the probability we want
to calculate we want to know what's the
probability of having a newborn child
given that we selected a boy this is the
probability of the top branch divided by
the sum of the two probabilities of the
two branches in other words it's the
probability of selecting a boy and have
it be a newborn boy and divided by the
probability of selecting a boy so we
take the ratio of the probability of the
fringe divided by the sum of the two
probabilities this simplifies to four
out of seven which is approximately 57
point one percent so this is larger than
50% as we expected now what would happen
we assumed three girls in this case but
what would happen in
general let's assume we have g-girls
we start out with G girls and three boys
there's a 50% chance we have a boy which
would result in G girls and four boys
there's a 50% chance we have a girl
which results in G +1 girls and three
boys in the top branch there's a four
divided by G + 4 chance of selecting a
boy and we multiply that by the 50%
chance of the top branch having a boy
this is the probability of selecting a
boy and have it be a newborn boy in the
bottom branch we have three boys / G + 4
children in total we multiply by the 50%
probability of the branch this is the
probability of selecting a boy and
having a newborn girl so what's the
probability of selecting a boy this is
the sum of the two probabilities of
these two branches this is equal to 3
point 5 divided by G + 4 intuitively we
either have 3 or 4 boys the next day
happening with equal chance so we have 3
and 1/2 boys on average and we divide
that by the total number of children
which will always be G + 4 so what's the
probability that we want to calculate
the probability of having a newborn boy
given that we selected a boy at random
this is the ratio of the top branch
divided by the sum of the two branches
so we put in these two probabilities and
you can see that the G + 4 actually
cancels out this simplifies to be 4 / 7
which is approximately 57.1% so the two
counterintuitive things going on in this
problem one is that it doesn't matter
the number of girls we start with and 2
the probability is more than 50% we can
actually generalize a problem one more
step we start out with G girls but let's
assume we have B boys instead of saying
we have 3 boys let's say we have B boys
in that case we'll go ahead and draw out
our tree we'll count the number of boys
and girls we'll calculate the
conditional probabilities in each of
these cases
we again calculate the probability of
selecting a boy and then we calculate
the probability of having a newborn boy
given that we selected a boy this all
simplifies to BB plus 1 over 2b plus 1
so as the number of boys increases this
ratio is going to approach 1/2 which is
the 50% that we would expect so for
example if you start out with 50 boys
then you would have an approximately 50
point 5 percent chance that the newborn
child was a boy if you selected it so
that's pretty close to 50% it's slightly
more but it's a very counterintuitive
problem it doesn't matter the number of
girls you start with and the probability
is more than 50% did you figure this out
thanks for watching this video please
subscribe to my channel I make videos on
math and game theory you can catch me on
my blog mind your decisions which you
can follow on Facebook Google+ and
patreon you can catch me on social media
at pressure Locker and if you liked this
video please check out my books there
are links in the video description